Document conditions in Kubernetes (#47149)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/conditions.md

---
title: Conditions
content_type: concept
weight: 30
---

<!-- overview -->

> In Kubernetes, conditions as a concept are used to provide a detailed and structured status of a resource. This granular status information helps in understanding status of various Kubernetes objects and facilitates communication between different components of the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes, conditions as a concept are used to provide a detailed and structured status of an object.
This granular status information helps in understanding status of various Kubernetes objects and facilitates communication between different components of the system.
```

Reviewer: (wrapping the source Markdown, and using ”object” because we know these resources are also objects.

<!-- body -->

> ## Understanding Conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Understanding conditions
```

A condition in Kubernetes includes several key fields:

- **Type**: The specific kind of condition(e.g., `Ready`, `PodScheduled`).
- **Status**: The state of the condition, which can be `True`, `False`, or `Unknown`.
- **Reason**: String explaining why the condition is in a current state
- **Message**: Message explaining details of the message
- **Last Transition Time**: This represents the timestamp where condition last changed status

> ## Example: Pod Conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: Pod conditions
```

> Pods, which are an integral part of the Kubernetes resources use conditions to indicate their state. Below is an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Pod API uses conditions to indicate Pod state. Here is an example:
```

```yaml
status:
  conditions:
  - type: PodScheduled
    status: "True"
    lastTransitionTime: "2023-05-10T16:29:24Z"
  - type: Initialized
    status: "True"
    lastTransitionTime: "2023-05-10T16:29:24Z"
  - type: ContainersReady
    status: "True"
    lastTransitionTime: "2023-05-10T16:29:31Z"
  - type: Ready
    status: "True"
    lastTransitionTime: "2023-05-10T16:29:31Z"
```

In this example, each condition provides specific information about the pod's status, such as whether it has been scheduled, initialized, or is ready to handle traffic.

In example above, each condition provides information as to the status of the pod. Whether the pod has been scheduled, initialized and ready to accept different traffic. Also whether the container in the pod are ready to be started.

> ## Purpose and Usage of Conditions

Reviewer 2: Please check the formatting of the list(s) in this section to ensure it renders correctly.
**[Preview link here for reference (click here)](https://deploy-preview-47149--kubernetes-io-main-staging.netlify.app/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/conditions/#purpose-and-usage-of-conditions)**

Author: @dipesh-rawat  There seems to be some issue with the link you have mentioned. Can you reshare the correct ones

> 
> ## Purpose and Usage of Conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Purpose and usage of conditions
```

* **Activity Engine**: They help custom controllers to perform actions. For given conditions, controllers can make HTTP requests, call to cloud API, etc. Once a pod is unschedulable, a controller might create more resources, Websites, etc.

* **Events**:

* They are used to record a single one-time event.

* **Examples**: Kubernetes uses events to report changes during the control plane’s request processing. It uses events for purely informational purposes, trying to help understand what’s going on in the cluster.

Examples where Conditions are used:

* `FrequentSyncError`: Indicates the resource Seeding controller is struggling to create.

* `ComponentsInstalled`: Indicates that a desired state of components has been installed.

* `Repairing`: Indicates that the controller has started repairing things.

* `Mounted`: Indicates that a controller from the Cloud integration is successfully mounted on the node.

* **Conditions**:

* They provide an engineering statement regarding the running process.

* **Defining Conditions**: When we design conditions, multiple things have to be cared upon.

> * **Polarity**: any unhealthy state should be `True`.

Reviewer: > Condition types should indicate state in the “abnormal-true” polarity. For example, if the condition indicates when a policy is invalid, the “is valid” case is probably the norm, so the condition should be called “Invalid”.

That's quoting the API conventions, which I think you're paraphrasing here. However:

> For some conditions, True represents normal operation, and for some conditions, False represents normal operation. ("Normal-true" conditions are sometimes said to have "positive polarity", and "normal-false" conditions are said to have "negative polarity".) Without further knowledge of the conditions, it is not possible to compute a generic summary of the conditions on a resource.

That's also quoting the same API conventions.

We should at least comment in passing that the example from earlier has:
 - `PodScheduled`
 - `Initialized`
- `ContainersReady`
- `Ready`

which are all abnormal-false.

Author: @sftim  Could you explain this further getting confused on this feedback

* **Extensibility**

* **Meaning**: once a condition is defined, it should have the same meaning. This is because of backward compatibility. Because of this, only a single condition indicating an abnormal state must be defined.

It should be noticed that conditions are observations and not state machines. They are free-formers and don’t have states.

* **Code examples**:

Some not-so-well-known example of how conditions are used in various Kubernetes projects are:

* [Cert-Manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/concepts/issuer/): The `Ready` condition is used for issuers.

* OpenShift defines custom conditions, like `Available`, `Progressing`, `Degraded`, `Upgradable`, etc.

* [Hyperconverged Cluster Operator](https://github.com/openshift/hypershift): The conditions are used to represent the state of component custom resources.

> * Gardene uses two conditions: `Valid` and `Installed` for the controller installation.

Reviewer: I wouldn't include any of these. You could use Gateway API and Cluster API for in-project examples. Or [Node](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/node/node-status/#condition).

> ## Further Reading

Reviewer 2: Consider using following title for consistency with other pages.

```suggestion
## {{% heading "whatsnext" %}}
```

If you want to learn more about conditions and when to use them in Kubernetes, you can refer to:

> 

Reviewer: Ideally, also link to [Pod readiness gates](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#pod-readiness-gate)

> - [Pod Lifecycle](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#pod-conditions)

Reviewer 2: We use site-relative links where feasible.

```suggestion
- [Pod Lifecycle](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#pod-conditions)
```

---
title: Conditions
content_type: concept
weight: 30
---

<!-- overview -->
In Kubernetes, conditions as a concept are used to provide a detailed and structured status of an object.
This granular status information helps in understanding status of various Kubernetes objects and facilitates communication between different components of the system.

<!-- body -->
## Understanding conditions

A condition in Kubernetes includes several key fields:

> - **Type**: The specific kind of condition(e.g., `Ready`, `PodScheduled`).
> - **Status**: The state of the condition, which can be `True`, `False`, or `Unknown`.
> - **Reason**: String explaining why the condition is in a current state
> - **Message**: Message explaining details of the message
> - **Last Transition Time**: This represents the timestamp where condition last changed status

Reviewer: Try this:
```suggestion
`type`
: The specific kind of condition (such as `Ready` or `PodScheduled`).

`status`
: The state of the condition, which can be `True`, `False`, or `Unknown`.

`reason` (optional)
: String explaining why the condition is in a current state.

`message` (optional)
: Additional details about this condition.

`lastTransitionTime`
: The timestamp when the condition last changed status.
```

## Example: Pod conditions

The Pod API uses conditions to indicate Pod state. Here is an example:

```yaml
status:
  conditions:
  - type: PodScheduled
    status: "True"
    lastTransitionTime: "2023-05-10T16:29:24Z"
  - type: Initialized
    status: "True"
    lastTransitionTime: "2023-05-10T16:29:24Z"
  - type: ContainersReady
    status: "True"
    lastTransitionTime: "2023-05-10T16:29:31Z"
  - type: Ready
    status: "True"
    lastTransitionTime: "2023-05-10T16:29:31Z"
```

In this example, each condition provides specific information about the pod's status, such as whether it has been scheduled, initialized, or is ready to handle traffic.

> In example above, each condition provides information as to the status of the pod. Whether the pod has been scheduled, initialized and ready to accept different traffic. Also whether the container in the pod are ready to be started.

Reviewer: Try to reword this sentence to be more idiomatic English.

## Purpose and usage of conditions

Conditions being an integral part of Kubernetes play very important role by:

* **Status Information**: Conditions provide an in-depth understanding of the existing cluster state or resources. They help the user or a machine understand what’s going on.

* **Communication**: Conditions act as a form of communication inside the cluster. It helps various components like the kubelet, the scheduler talk to each other or custom controllers to send and receive messages.

* **Activity Engine**: They help custom controllers to perform actions. For given conditions, controllers can make HTTP requests, call to cloud API, etc. Once a pod is unschedulable, a controller might create more resources, Websites, etc.

* **Events**:

* They are used to record a single one-time event.

> * **Examples**: Kubernetes uses events to report changes during the control plane’s request processing. It uses events for purely informational purposes, trying to help understand what’s going on in the cluster.

Reviewer: Conditions help to convey machine-readable status about objects, that a human
is also likely to be able to understand. Conditions help
{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="controller" text="controllers" >}} to send and receive
information about the actual state of the cluster. The messaging is indirect (the
sending controller does not have to be aware of which controllers or people might
read that information).

After observing particular conditions, controllers can make HTTP requests (either to
the Kubernetes API, or perhaps to an external cloud provider). Although HTTP integration
is a common pattern, a controller that relies on conditions is free to use any other means
to perform work.

### Example: controller that manages Nodes {#example-node-autoscaling}

After observing that a Pod is unschedulable, a controller acting as a
[node autoscaler](/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/cluster-autoscaling/)
might trigger creation of a new virtual machine that will become a node and
provide additional capacity.

### Example: thermostat {#example-thermostat}

(To illustrate the concept, here is an unlikely but simple example). You could make a
thermostat based on the Kubernetes API, defining a custom API kind named Room.

In this example, when a Room object has the condition `TooCold` become true, a
controller turns on heating.
If the `TooWarm` condition becomes true, the controller activates cooling.
```

> Examples where Conditions are used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Example uses for conditions {#uses-for-conditions}
```

* `FrequentSyncError`: Indicates the resource Seeding controller is struggling to create.

* `ComponentsInstalled`: Indicates that a desired state of components has been installed.

* `Repairing`: Indicates that the controller has started repairing things.

> * `Mounted`: Indicates that a controller from the Cloud integration is successfully mounted on the node.

Reviewer: Which of these are part of Kubernetes itself?

> * **Conditions**:
> 
> * They provide an engineering statement regarding the running process.
> 
> * **Defining Conditions**: When we design conditions, multiple things have to be cared upon.
> 
> * **Polarity**: any unhealthy state should be `True`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * **Extensibility**
> 
> * **Meaning**: once a condition is defined, it should have the same meaning. This is because of backward compatibility. Because of this, only a single condition indicating an abnormal state must be defined.
> 
> It should be noticed that conditions are observations and not state machines. They are free-formers and don’t have states.
> 
> ## Examples of conditions usage in kubernetes projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
